add cms tutorial for cakephp/authentication plugin (#6287)
cakephp/docs: en/tutorials-and-examples/cms/authentication-plugin.rst

CMS Tutorial - Authentication using cakephp/authentication
##########################################################

CakePHP now supports Authentication and Authorization features using the
core plugins cakephp/authentication and cakephp/authorization.

> In this tutorial we are going to ensure passwords are stored securely in

Reviewer: I would turn this into a list for clarity.

our database, we are going to provide a working login page, and apply some
basic access control to the article creation & editing experiences.

We will assume you have created the ``Controller``, ``Table``, ``Entity`` and

> templates for the ``users`` table in your database, you can do this manually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
templates for the ``users`` table in your database. You can do this manually
```

like you did before for the ArticlesController, or you can use the bake shell
to generate the classes for you using ``bin/cake bake all users``.

Adding Password Hashing
-----------------------

> If you were to create/update a user at this point in time, you might notice that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you create or update a user with this setup, you might notice that
```

the passwords are stored in plain text. This is really bad from a security point
of view, so lets fix that.

This is also a good time to talk about the model layer in CakePHP. In CakePHP,

> we separate the methods that operate on a collection of objects, and a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we use different classes to operate on collections of records and single records.
```

object into different classes. Methods that operate on the collection of
entities are put in the ``Table`` class, while features belonging to a single
record are put on the ``Entity`` class.

For example, password hashing is done on the individual record, so we'll
implement this behavior on the entity object. Because we want to hash the
password each time it is set, we'll use a mutator/setter method. CakePHP will
call a convention based setter method any time a property is set in one of your
entities. Let's add a setter for the password. In **src/Model/Entity/User.php**
add the following::

    <?php
    namespace App\Model\Entity;

    use Authentication\PasswordHasher\DefaultPasswordHasher; // Add this line
    use Cake\ORM\Entity;

    class User extends Entity
    {

        // Code from bake.

        // Add this method
        protected function _setPassword(string $password) : ?string
        {
            if (strlen($password) > 0) {
                return (new DefaultPasswordHasher())->hash($password);
            }
        }
    }

Now, point your browser to **http://localhost:8765/users** to see a list of users.

> Remember you'll need to have your local server running, start a standalone PHP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember you'll need to have your local server running. Start a standalone PHP
```

server using ``bin/cake server``

You can edit the default user that was created during
:doc:`Installation <installation>`. If you change that user's password,
you should see a hashed password instead of the original value on the list or
view pages. CakePHP hashes passwords with `bcrypt
<http://codahale.com/how-to-safely-store-a-password/>`_ by default. We recommend

> bcrypt for all new applications to keep your security standards high.

Reviewer: Might want to mention it is the default for PHP as well (with password_hash) to suggest it's more than just our arbitrary pick.

.. note::

    Create a hashed password for at least one of the user accounts now! 
    It will be needed in the next steps.
    After updating the password, you'll see a long string stored in the password column.
    Note bcrypt will generate a different hash even for the same password saved twice.
    

Installing Authentication Plugin
================================

Use composer to install the Authentication Plugin::

>     composer require cakephp/authentication:^2.0

Reviewer: bash code block?

Adding Login
============

Now it's time to configure the Authentication Plugin.
The Plugin will handle the authentication process using 3 different classes:

* ``Application`` will use the Authentication Middleware and provide an
  AuthenticationService, holding all the configuration we want to define how are
we going to check the credentials, and where to find them.
* ``AuthenticationService`` will be a utility class to allow you configure the
authentication process.
* ``AuthenticationMiddleware`` will be executed as part of the middleware queue,
this is before your Controllers are processed by the framework, and will pick the
credentials and process them to check if the user is authenticated.

If you remember, we used :doc:`AuthComponent </controllers/components/authentication>`
before to handle all these steps. Now the logic is divided into specific classes and

> the authentication process happens before your controller layer, checking if the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the authentication process happens before your controller layer. First it checks if the user
```

> is authenticated (based in the configuration you provided) and injecting the user and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is authenticated (based in the configuration you provided) and injects the user and
```

> the authentication results in the request for further reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the authentication results into the request for further reference.
```

> In you Application class add the following code::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your Application class, add the following code::
```

        // Load identifiers, ensure we check email and password fields
        $authenticationService->loadIdentifier('Authentication.Password', [
            'fields' => [
                'username' => 'email',
                'password' => 'password',
            ]
        ]);

        // Load the authenticators, you want session first
        $authenticationService->loadAuthenticator('Authentication.Session');
        // Configure form data check to pick email and password
        $authenticationService->loadAuthenticator('Authentication.Form', [
            'fields' => [
                'username' => 'email',
                'password' => 'password',
            ],
            'loginUrl' => '/users/login',
        ]);

        return $authenticationService;
    }

In you AppController class add the following code

    // src/Controller/AppController.php
    public function initialize(): void
    {
        parent::initialize();
        $this->loadComponent('RequestHandler');
        $this->loadComponent('Flash');
        // add this like to check authentication result and lock your site
        $this->loadComponent('Authentication.Authentication');

> After adding this code, on every request, the AuthenticationMiddleware will inspect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, on every request, the AuthenticationMiddleware will inspect
```

> the request session to look for an authenticated user, and if we are in /users/login

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the request session to look for an authenticated user. If we are loading the /users/login
```

page, it'll inspect also the posted form data (if any) to extract the credentials.
By default the credentials will be extracted from the ``username`` and ``password``
fields in the request data.
The authentication result will be injected in a request attribute named
``authentication``. You can inspect the result at any time using
``$this->request->getAttribute('authentication')`` from your controller actions.

> All your pages will be locked, as the ``AuthenticationComponent`` is checking the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All your pages will be restricted as the ``AuthenticationComponent`` is checking the
```

> result on every request, and not finding any authenticated user, it'll redirect the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
result on every request. When it fails to find any authenticated user, it'll redirect the
```

user to the ``/users/login`` page.

> Note at this point, the site won't work as we don't have a login page yet...

Reviewer: Don't need both sentences to end in ...

            $this->Flash->error(__('Invalid username or password'));
        }
    }

    public function logout()
    {
        $result = $this->Authentication->getResult();
        // regardless of POST or GET, redirect if user is logged in
        if ($result->isValid()) {
            $this->Authentication->logout();
            return $this->redirect(['controller' => 'Users', 'action' => 'login']);
        }
    }

Add the template logic for your login action

    // in /templates/Users/login.php
    <div class="users form">
        <?= $this->Flash->render() ?>
        <?= $this->Form->create() ?>
        <fieldset>
            <legend><?= __('Please enter your username and password') ?></legend>
            <?= $this->Form->control('email', ['required' => true]) ?>
            <?= $this->Form->control('password', ['required' => true]) ?>
        </fieldset>
        <?= $this->Form->submit(__('Login')); ?>
        <?= $this->Form->end() ?>
    </div>

Now login page will allow us to correctly login into the application.
Test it by requesting any page of your site and after being redirected
to the ``/users/login`` page and entering the email and password you

> picked previously when creating your user, you'll be redirected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
picked previously when creating your user. You should be redirected
```

successfully after login.

> We need to add a couple more details to configure our application,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to add a couple more details to configure our application.
```

> we want all ``view`` and ``index`` pages "public" so we'll add this specific

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want all ``view`` and ``index`` pages "public" so we'll add this specific
```

configuration in AppController::

    // in src/Controller/AppController.php
    public function beforeFilter(\Cake\Event\EventInterface $event)
    {
        parent::beforeFilter($event);
        // for all controllers in our application, make index and view
        // actions public, skipping the authentication check
        $this->Authentication->addUnauthenticatedActions(['index', 'view']);
    }

.. note::

    If you don't have a user with a hashed password yet, comment the
    ``loadComponent('Authentication.Authentication')`` line in your AppController
    and go to ``/users/add`` to create a new user picking email and password.
    Make sure to uncomment the lines we just temporarily commented!

> Try it out! Before logging in, visit ``/articles/add``. Since this action is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try it out! Visit ``/articles/add`` before logging in. Since this action is not
```

allowed, you will be redirected to the login page. After logging in
successfully, CakePHP will automatically redirect you back to ``/articles/add``.

Logout
======

> Note we've added the logout action previously. Now you can visit

Reviewer: Kinda awkward to have a section for something you already did.

Author: refactored a bit

``/users/logout`` to log out. You should then be sent to the login page.

Enabling Registrations
======================

> If you aren't logged in and you try to visit **/users/add** you will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you try to visit **/users/add** without being logged in, you will be
```

basic access control to the article creation & editing experiences.

We will assume you have created the ``Controller``, ``Table``, ``Entity`` and
templates for the ``users`` table in your database, you can do this manually
like you did before for the ArticlesController, or you can use the bake shell
to generate the classes for you using ``bin/cake bake all users``.

Adding Password Hashing
-----------------------

If you were to create/update a user at this point in time, you might notice that
the passwords are stored in plain text. This is really bad from a security point
of view, so lets fix that.

This is also a good time to talk about the model layer in CakePHP. In CakePHP,
we separate the methods that operate on a collection of objects, and a single
object into different classes. Methods that operate on the collection of
entities are put in the ``Table`` class, while features belonging to a single
record are put on the ``Entity`` class.

For example, password hashing is done on the individual record, so we'll
implement this behavior on the entity object. Because we want to hash the
password each time it is set, we'll use a mutator/setter method. CakePHP will

> call convention based setter methods any time a property is set in one of your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
call a convention based setter method any time a property is set in one of your
```

entities. Let's add a setter for the password. In **src/Model/Entity/User.php**
add the following::

    <?php
    namespace App\Model\Entity;

>     use Cake\Auth\DefaultPasswordHasher; // Add this line

Reviewer 2: Should they use the password hasher from the plugin?

Author: Absolutely

        protected function _setPassword(string $password) : ?string
        {
            if (strlen($password) > 0) {
                return (new DefaultPasswordHasher())->hash($password);
            }
        }
    }

Now, point your browser to **http://localhost:8765/users** to see a list of users.
Remember you'll need to have your local server running, start a standalone PHP
server using ``bin/cake server``

You can edit the default user that was created during
:doc:`Installation <installation>`. If you change that user's password,
you should see a hashed password instead of the original value on the list or
view pages. CakePHP hashes passwords with `bcrypt
<http://codahale.com/how-to-safely-store-a-password/>`_ by default. We recommend
bcrypt for all new applications to keep your security standards high.

.. note::

    Create a hashed password for at least one of the user accounts now! 
    It will be needed in the next steps.
    After updating the password, you'll see a long string stored in the password column.
    Note bcrypt will generate a different hash even for the same password saved twice.
    

Installing Authentication Plugin
================================

> Use composer to install the Authentication Plugin

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use composer to install the Authentication Plugin::
```

    composer require cakephp/authentication:^2.0

Adding Login
============

Now it's time to configure the Authentication Plugin.
The Plugin will handle the authentication process using 3 different classes:

* ``Application`` will use the Authentication Middleware and provide an

> AuthenticationService, holding all the configuration we want to define how are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  AuthenticationService, holding all the configuration we want to define how are
```

The wrapped lines of a bulleted list need to be aligned to be formatted correctly.

we going to check the credentials, and where to find them.
* ``AuthenticationService`` will be a utility class to allow you configure the
authentication process.
* ``AuthenticationMiddleware`` will be executed as part of the middleware queue,
this is before your Controllers are processed by the framework, and will pick the
credentials and process them to check if the user is authenticated.

If you remember, we used :doc:`AuthComponent </controllers/components/authentication>`
before to handle all these steps. Now the logic is divided into specific classes and
the authentication process happens before your controller layer, checking if the user
is authenticated (based in the configuration you provided) and injecting the user and
the authentication results in the request for further reference.

> In you Application class add the following code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In you Application class add the following code::
```

    // src/Application.php
    public function middleware(MiddlewareQueue $middlewareQueue): MiddlewareQueue
    {
        $middlewareQueue
            // ... other middleware added before
            ->add(new RoutingMiddleware($this))
            // add Authentication after RoutingMiddleware
            ->add(new \Authentication\Middleware\AuthenticationMiddleware($this->configAuth(), [
                'unauthenticatedRedirect' => '/users/login',
                'queryParam' => 'redirect',
            ]));

        return $middlewareQueue;
    }

>     protected function configAuth(): \Authentication\AuthenticationService

Reviewer 2: Should we recommend using the provider interface? It is more boilerplate, so perhaps this approach is better.

    {
        $authenticationService = new \Authentication\AuthenticationService();

        // Load identifiers, ensure we check email and password fields
        $authenticationService->loadIdentifier('Authentication.Password', [
            'fields' => [
                'username' => 'email',
                'password' => 'password',
            ]
        ]);

        // Load the authenticators, you want session first
        $authenticationService->loadAuthenticator('Authentication.Session');
        // Configure form data check to pick email and password
        $authenticationService->loadAuthenticator('Authentication.Form', [
            'fields' => [
                'username' => 'email',
                'password' => 'password',
            ],
            'loginUrl' => '/users/login',
        ]);

        return $authenticationService;
    }

> In you AppController class add the following code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In you AppController class add the following code::
```

    // src/Controller/AppController.php
    public function initialize(): void
    {
        parent::initialize();
        $this->loadComponent('RequestHandler');
        $this->loadComponent('Flash');
        // add this like to check authentication result and lock your site
        $this->loadComponent('Authentication.Authentication');

> After adding this code, on every request, the AuthenticationMiddleware will inspect

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After adding this code, on every request, the ``AuthenticationMiddleware`` will inspect
```

> the request session to look for an authenticated user, and if we are in /users/login

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the request session to look for an authenticated user, and if we are in ``/users/login``
```

page, it'll inspect also the posted form data (if any) to extract the credentials.
By default the credentials will be extracted from the ``username`` and ``password``
fields in the request data.
The authentication result will be injected in a request attribute named
``authentication``. You can inspect the result at any time using
``$this->request->getAttribute('authentication')`` from your controller actions.
All your pages will be locked, as the ``AuthenticationComponent`` is checking the
result on every request, and not finding any authenticated user, it'll redirect the
user to the ``/users/login`` page.
Note at this point, the site won't work as we don't have a login page yet...
If you visit your site, you'll get an "infinite redirect loop" so let's fix that...

> In your UsersController, add the following code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In your UsersController, add the following code::
```

    public function beforeFilter(\Cake\Event\EventInterface $event)
    {
        parent::beforeFilter($event);
        // configure the login action to don't require authentication, preventing
        // the infinite redirect loop issue
        $this->Authentication->addUnauthenticatedActions(['login']);
    }

>     public function login()

Reviewer 2: You need a brace after this line.

        $this->request->allowMethod(['get', 'post']);
        $result = $this->Authentication->getResult();
        // regardless of POST or GET, redirect if user is logged in
        if ($result->isValid()) {
            // redirect to /pages/home after login success

>             $redirect = $this->request->getQuery('redirect', [

Reviewer 2: Could we use `$this->Authentication->getLoginRedirect() ?? ['controller' => 'Pages', 'action' => 'display', 'home']` instead? This approach leaves the application with an open-redirect.

                'controller' => 'Pages',
                'action' => 'display',
                'home'
            ]);

            return $this->redirect($redirect);
        }
        // display error if user submitted and authentication failed
        if ($this->request->is('post') && !$result->isValid()) {
            $this->Flash->error(__('Invalid username or password'));
        }
    }

    public function logout()
    {
        $result = $this->Authentication->getResult();
        // regardless of POST or GET, redirect if user is logged in
        if ($result->isValid()) {
            $this->Authentication->logout();
            return $this->redirect(['controller' => 'Users', 'action' => 'login']);
        }
    }

Add the template logic for your login action

    // in /templates/Users/login.php
    <div class="users form">

>         <?= $this->Flash->render('auth') ?>

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need the `'auth'` here.

        <?= $this->Form->create() ?>
        <fieldset>
            <legend><?= __('Please enter your username and password') ?></legend>
            <?= $this->Form->control('email', ['required' => true]) ?>
            <?= $this->Form->control('password', ['required' => true]) ?>
        </fieldset>
        <?= $this->Form->submit(__('Login')); ?>
        <?= $this->Form->end() ?>
    </div>

Now login page will allow us to correctly login into the application.
Test it by requesting any page of your site and after being redirected
to the ``/users/login`` page and entering the email and password you
picked previously when creating your user, you'll be redirected
successfully after login.

We need to add a couple more details to configure our application,
we want all ``view`` and ``index`` pages "public" so we'll add this specific

> configuration in AppController.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration in AppController::
```

    // in src/Controller/AppController.php
    public function beforeFilter(\Cake\Event\EventInterface $event)
    {
        parent::beforeFilter($event);
        // for all controllers in our application, make index and view
        // actions public, skipping the authentication check
        $this->Authentication->addUnauthenticatedActions(['index', 'view']);
    }

.. note::

    If you don't have a user with a hashed password yet, comment the
    ``loadComponent('Authentication.Authentication')`` line in your AppController
    and go to ``/users/add`` to create a new user picking email and password.

>     You've just hacked your own app.

Reviewer 2: I would not include this line it could confuse people.

Author: Let's exchange fun for clarity :)

    Make sure to uncomment the lines we just temporarily commented!

Try it out! Before logging in, visit ``/articles/add``. Since this action is not
allowed, you will be redirected to the login page. After logging in
successfully, CakePHP will automatically redirect you back to ``/articles/add``.

Logout
======

Note we've added the logout action previously. Now you can visit
``/users/logout`` to log out. You should then be sent to the login page.

Enabling Registrations
======================

If you aren't logged in and you try to visit **/users/add** you will be
redirected to the login page. We should fix that as we want to allow people to

> sign up for our application. In the ``UsersController`` fix the following line:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sign up for our application. In the ``UsersController`` fix the following line::
```

        $this->Authentication->addUnauthenticatedActions(['login', 'add']);

The above tells ``AuthenticationComponent`` that the ``add()`` action of the
``UsersController`` does *not* require authentication or authorization. You may
want to take the time to clean up the **Users/add.php** and remove the
misleading links, or continue on to the next section. We won't be building out
user editing, viewing or listing in this tutorial, but that is an exercise you
can complete on your own.

Coming next:  Article Access
============================

Now that users can log in, we'll want to limit users to only edit articles that
they created. We'll do this using the Authorization Plugin in the next chapter.

Continue to

> :doc:`Authorization </tutorials-and-examples/cms/authorization-plugin.rst>` to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:doc:`Authorization </tutorials-and-examples/cms/authorization-plugin>` to
```

* ``AuthenticationMiddleware`` will be executed as part of the middleware queue,
this is before your Controllers are processed by the framework, and will pick the
credentials and process them to check if the user is authenticated.

If you remember, we used :doc:`AuthComponent </controllers/components/authentication>`
before to handle all these steps. Now the logic is divided into specific classes and
the authentication process happens before your controller layer. First it checks if the user
is authenticated (based in the configuration you provided) and injects the user and
the authentication results into the request for further reference.

In your Application class, add the following code::

    // src/Application.php
    public function middleware(MiddlewareQueue $middlewareQueue): MiddlewareQueue
    {
        $middlewareQueue
            // ... other middleware added before
            ->add(new RoutingMiddleware($this))
            // add Authentication after RoutingMiddleware
            ->add(new \Authentication\Middleware\AuthenticationMiddleware($this->configAuth(), [
                'unauthenticatedRedirect' => '/users/login',
                'queryParam' => 'redirect',

>             ]));

Reviewer 3: setting `unauthenticatedRedirect` and `queryParam` on the `AuthenticationMiddleware` deprecated

Author: 110% right, fixed, thank you.
